What is the most critical skill a leader can possess when working with others?
What do you think it is?
The ability to communicate appropriately is an essential
component for effective leadership.
In this study,
43% of respondents identified communication skills as the most critical set.
Now when that question was flipped around,
in other words,
when employees were asked what mistake leaders made when working with others,
41% (not shown on this chart) identified the inappropriate use of
communication as the number one mistake leaders make.
The inappropriate use of communication as the number
one mistake leaders could make.
So the data, I will suggest to you,
that communication is essential to leadership is overwhelming.
Let me tell you a secret.
The secret to successful leadership.
You hear it all the time,
aspiring team leaders or managers want to know the most important
key to an esteemed business leader's success.
I'm thinking the answer must be something like inspiring leadership,
technological innovation, savvy marketing,
financial planning, all of which are important of course,
but their jaws drop, their eyes pop when they learn the secret.
Generally,
the leader success is directly tied to his or her
ability to focus on business fundamentals.
Certainly, strong and effective leaders stress fundamentals like discipline,
accountability, strategic alignment to the business,
managing to his or her values and empowering employees.
All great skills, certainly.
Could the secret be the ability to have mastered the
six basic functions of management?
Leading, planning, organizing, staffing, controlling, and communicating?
By the way,
if you want to learn more about these basic project management skills,
please check out my class titled, Project Management for Software Engineers.
It's a great companion class for this class.
Well, the secret to successful leadership is,
of course, effective communication.
I mean, think about it.
How do the best leaders motivate and inspire their people?
Through clear communication.
How do the best organizations promote discipline,
accountability, and strategic alignment?
Well, with clear communication.
In real estate, you've heard the old cliché many times.
It's location, location, location.
Well, in business leadership, it is communication, communication, communication.
What makes a great leader?
What makes you stand out from the crowd?
Let me tell you.
It's effective communications.
A big part of your job now as the new team leader is
communicating with others; your team, your customers,
and your management in a different and much more influential way than
in your previous assignment as a software engineer.
You're going to have to amp it up.
Leaders need to be great communicators.
One of your most important skills will need improvement on.
It is hard to imagine a successful leader who is not a good communicator.
As a software engineer,
you may not have considered how important communicating with others is,
and as software engineers, we may not have had much of a need but now you do.
You will need to lead and manage business outcomes.
You will now be the rainmaker and therefore the influencer.
Managing customer expectations.
The customer and stakeholder should never be
wondering about how the project is going.
Managing the project team.
Your team should not be wondering on what to do next and
your direct report manager should not be in the dark about
your project's progress either.
Communicating with your management.
You will need to provide regular and consistent feedback
to your manager about your team's activities and any
issues you may have and of course,
listen and receive guidance and direction from your manager that you
will then need to later communicate to your team.
Lastly,
effective communication may enhance your professionalism and
the perceived success of your new team.
Okay, how do you think you can best connect with your new team? Well, let's see.